:title: Operation

.. _operation:

Operation
=========

You can run any zuul process with the **-f** option to make it not
daemonize and stay in the foreground, logging to your terminal. It's a
good idea at first to check for issues with your configuration.
There's also a **-d** option to engage verbose debug logging, but be
careful in busy deployments as this can generate very large logs.

To start, simply run::

    zuul-scheduler

Before Zuul can run any jobs, it needs to load its configuration, most
of which is in the git repositories that Zuul operates on.  Start an
executor to allow zuul to do that::

    zuul-executor

Zuul should now be able to read its configuration from the configured
repo and process any jobs defined therein.

Scheduler
---------

Operation
~~~~~~~~~

To start the scheduler, run ``zuul-scheduler``.  To stop it, run
``zuul-scheduler stop``.

.. _reconfiguration:

Reconfiguration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Most of Zuul's configuration is automatically updated as changes to
the repositories which contain it are merged.  However, Zuul must be
explicitly notified of changes to the tenant config file, since it is
not read from a git repository. Zuul supports two kinds of reconfigurations.

The full reconfiguration refetches and reloads the configuration of
all tenants. To do so, run ``zuul-scheduler full-reconfigure``. For
example this can be used to fix eventual configuration inconsistencies
after connection problems with the code hosting system.

To perform the same actions as a full reconfiguration but for a single
tenant, use ``zuul-scheduler tenant-reconfigure TENANT`` (where
``TENANT`` is the name of the tenant to reconfigure).

The smart reconfiguration reloads only the tenants that changed their
configuration in the tenant config file. To do so, run
``zuul-scheduler smart-reconfigure``. In multi tenant systems this can
be much faster than the full reconfiguration so it is recommended to
use the smart reconfiguration after changing the tenant configuration
file.

The ``tenant-reconfigure`` and ``smart-reconfigure`` commands should
only be run on a single scheduler.  Other schedulers will see any
changes to the configuration stored in ZooKeeper and automatically
update their configuration in the background without interrupting
processing.

Advanced Options
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

These options are not necessary under normal conditions, but may be
useful in some complex environments.

The ``--wait-for-init`` option (or ``ZUUL_WAIT_FOR_INIT`` environment
variable) will cause the scheduler to wait until all tenants
have been initialized before it begins processing pipelines.  This may
help large systems with excess scheduler capacity perform a rolling
restart of schedulers more quickly.

The ``--disable-pipelines`` option (or ``ZUUL_DISABLE_PIPELINES``
environment variable) will cause the scheduler to silently discard all
pipeline related events.  This allows the scheduler to create and
maintain all of the configuration of a running system without running
any jobs or making any reports.

This option is not intended for normal use, and is only useful for
certain testing and backup-related activities.  Because any scheduler
connected to ZooKeeper can process events, it does not make sense to
mix values of this option.  Normal production Zuul systems that are
intended to process events should not set this option on any
schedulers.  To use this option on a standby or testing cluster, set
it on all schedulers.

.. _backup:

Backup and Restoration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

While all of Zuul's component services are designed to be run in a
resilient active-active clustered deployment, a good disaster recovery
plan should include backing up critical data. At a minimum, the
randomly-generated project keys used for encryption of job secrets and
SSH access should be backed up, as they **cannot be recreated** if
lost. Zuul stores these keys in a keystore in ZooKeeper which is
inconvenient to back up directly, but provides an administrative tool
to :ref:`export <export-keys>` these keys to and :ref:`import
<import-keys>` them from a local directory.

It's highly recommended to set up periodic automation for dumping such
an export to a secure location (for example, on the filesystem of each
Zuul Scheduler) for use in a disaster where all ZooKeeper content is
lost. You may also consider configuring a safe remote backup of these
files with the tool of your choice, but be aware that they are
potentially sensitive since anyone who gains access to them could
decrypt job secrets or access protected systems which have been
instructed to trust those keys.

Note that the exported keys are symmetrically encrypted with the same
:ref:`keystore.password <keystore-password>` which is used for
encrypting and decrypting the copy of them in ZooKeeper, because its
the encrypted versions of the keys which are exported and imported.
Someone with access to the keys would also need a copy of the
keystore.password from Zuul's configuration, so for security-sensitive
environments you may not want to back them up together. Conversely, if
you lose the keystore.password then you also lose the use of the
project keys in the keystore and any exports, so you will likely want
to make sure you keep a secured copy of it somewhere as well in the
event your server configuration is lost.

Merger
------

Operation
~~~~~~~~~

To start the merger, run ``zuul-merger``.

In order to stop the merger and under normal circumstances it is
best to pause and wait for all currently running tasks to finish
before stopping it. To do so run ``zuul-merger pause``.

To stop the merger, run ``zuul-merger stop``. This will wait for any
currently running merge task to complete before exiting. As a result
this is always a graceful way to stop the merger.
``zuul-merger graceful`` is an alias for ``zuul-merger stop`` to make
this consistent with the executor.

Executor
--------

Operation
~~~~~~~~~

To start the executor, run ``zuul-executor``.

There are several commands which can be run to control the executor's
behavior once it is running.

To pause the executor and prevent it from running new jobs you can
run ``zuul-executor pause``.

To cause the executor to stop accepting new jobs and exit when all running
jobs have finished you can run ``zuul-executor graceful``. Under most
circumstances this will be the best way to stop Zuul.

To stop the executor immediately, run ``zuul-executor stop``. Jobs that were
running on the stopped executor will be rescheduled on other executors.

The executor normally responds to a ``SIGTERM`` signal in the same way
as the ``graceful`` command, however you can change this behavior to match
``stop`` with the :attr:`executor.sigterm_method` setting.

To enable or disable running Ansible in verbose mode (with the
``-vvv`` argument to ansible-playbook) run ``zuul-executor verbose``
and ``zuul-executor unverbose``.

.. _ansible-and-python-3:

Ansible and Python 3
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

As noted above, the executor runs Ansible playbooks against the remote
node(s) allocated for the job.  Since part of executing playbooks on
remote hosts is running Python scripts on them, Ansible needs to know
what Python interpreter to use on the remote host.  With older
distributions, ``/usr/bin/python2`` was a generally sensible choice.
However, over time a heterogeneous Python ecosystem has evolved where
older distributions may only provide Python 2, most provide a mixed
2/3 environment and newer distributions may only provide Python 3 (and
then others like RHEL8 may even have separate "system" Python versions
to add to confusion!).

Ansible's ``ansible_python_interpreter`` variable configures the path
to the remote Python interpreter to use during playbook execution.
This value is set by Zuul from the ``python-path`` specified for the
node by Nodepool; see the `nodepool configuration documentation
<https://zuul-ci.org/docs/nodepool/configuration.html>`__.

This defaults to ``auto``, where Ansible will automatically discover
the interpreter available on the remote host.  However, this setting
only became available in Ansible >=2.8, so Zuul will translate
``auto`` into the old default of ``/usr/bin/python2`` when configured
to use older Ansible versions.

Thus for modern Python 3-only hosts no further configuration is needed
when using Ansible >=2.8 (e.g. Fedora, Bionic onwards).  If using
earlier Ansible versions you may need to explicitly set the
``python-path`` if ``/usr/bin/python2`` is not available on the node.

Ansible roles/modules which include Python code are generally Python 3
safe now, but there is still a small possibility of incompatibility.
See also the Ansible `Python 3 support page
<https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/reference_appendices/python_3_support.html>`__.

.. _nodepool_console_streaming:

Log Streaming
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The log streaming service enables Zuul to show the live status of
long-running ``shell``, ``command``, ``win_shell``, or ``win_command``
tasks.

Log streaming is available on both Posix and Windows based hosts.  The
two systems operate in the same way with some minor differences.  They
are compatible, and in the case where a Windows host runs Windows
Subsystem for Linux (WSL), they may operate at the same time.

For Kubernetes-based job nodes the connection from the executor to the
log streaming daemon is established by using ``kubectl port-forward``
to forward a local port to the appropriate port on the pod containing
the job node.  If the Kubernetes user is not bound to a role that has
authorization for port-forwarding, this will prevent connection to
the daemon.

Posix Log Streaming
+++++++++++++++++++

The Posix log streaming service handles output from ``shell`` and
``command`` tasks.  The server side is setup by the ``zuul_console:``
task built-in to Zuul's Ansible installation.  The executor requires
the ability to communicate with this server on the job nodes via port
``19885`` for this to work.

The log streaming service spools command output via files on the job
node in the format ``/tmp/console-<uuid>-<task_id>-<host>.log``.  By
default, it will clean these files up automatically.

Occasionally, a streaming file may be left if a job is interrupted.
These may be safely removed after a short period of inactivity with a
command such as

.. code-block:: shell

   find /tmp -maxdepth 1 -name 'console-*-*-<host>.log' -mtime +2 -delete

If the executor is unable to reach port ``19885`` (for example due to
firewall rules), or the ``zuul_console`` daemon can not be run for
some other reason, the command to clean these spool files will not be
processed and they may be left behind; on an ephemeral node this is
not usually a problem, but on a static node these files will persist.

In this situation, Zuul can be instructed not to create any spool
files for ``shell``, ``command``, ``win_shell``, or ``win_command``
tasks by setting ``zuul_console_disabled: True`` (usually via a global
host variable in inventory).  Live streaming of these tasks will of
course be unavailable in this case, but no spool files will be
created.

Windows Log Streaming
+++++++++++++++++++++

The Windows log streaming service handles output from ``win_shell``
and ``win_command`` tasks.  The server side is setup by the
``win_zuul_console:`` task built-in to Zuul's Ansible installation.
The executor requires the ability to communicate with this server on
the job nodes via port ``19886`` for this to work.

The log streaming service spools command output via files on the job
node in the format ``C:/Users/All
Users/Zuul/console-console-<uuid>-<task_id>-<host>.log``.  By default,
it will clean these files up automatically.

Occasionally, a streaming file may be left if a job is interrupted.
These may be safely removed after a short period of inactivity.

If the executor is unable to reach port ``19886`` (for example due to
firewall rules), or the ``win_zuul_console`` daemon can not be run for
some other reason, the command to clean these spool files will not be
processed and they may be left behind; on an ephemeral node this is
not usually a problem, but on a static node these files will persist.

In this situation, Zuul can be instructed not to create any spool
files for ``shell``, ``command``, ``win_shell``, or ``win_command``
tasks by setting ``zuul_console_disabled: True`` (usually via a global
host variable in inventory).  Live streaming of these tasks will of
course be unavailable in this case, but no spool files will be
created.


Web Server
----------

Operation
~~~~~~~~~

To start the web server, run ``zuul-web``.  To stop it, kill the
PID which was saved in the pidfile specified in the configuration.

Finger Gateway
--------------


Operation
~~~~~~~~~

To start the finger gateway, run ``zuul-fingergw``.  To stop it, kill the
PID which was saved in the pidfile specified in the configuration.
